Code Book for Course Project of Getting and Cleaning Data

Raw Data

The raw data for this project is accelerometer data collected from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone, and was provided to us at the links below:

Data file: https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip
This data included both the raw sampled data (folder ../Inertial Signals) and features apparently based on the raw data. 
For the purpose of this project, I only need the features measurement, not the raw data.

The feature measurements were divided into two parts, one is the training data set which include all the feature measurements of 21 subjects (persons) on 6 different activities,
the other is the test date set, which include all the feature measurements of 9 subjects (persons) on the same 6 different activities.

For each of the test folder and training foler, there are 3 types of files to work with. 

In the test folder,
x_test.txt: contains 2947 rows with 561 feature measurements in column
y_test.txt: the activity labels corresponding to each row of x_test.txt
subject_test.txt: the subjects on which each row of X was measured. Encoded as numbers.


In the train folder,
x_train.txt: contains 7352 rows with 561 feature measurements in column
y_test.txt: the activity labels corresponding to each row of x_train.txt
subject_train.txt: the subjects on which each row of X was measured. Encoded as numbers.


In addition, to determine which features are required, we look at the list of features: features.txt
It include the list of 561 features for both the x_test.txt or x_train.txt

Also, the 'activity_labels.txt' contains the 6 different activities that were measured.

Data loading and merging

The Y, S and X data is loaded from each of the training and test datasets, to form the testdata and traindata respectively. 
Then the traindata and testdata are concatenated to form the completedata. To labeling the columns,
I use the features list obtained from the feature.txt to label the columns of feature measurement, as well as the "Subject" and "Activity" columns. --Step1

Column extractions
In the second step, I extract the mean() and sd() columns from the completedata by examining the feature names (from features.txt) for patterns “-mean()” or “-std()”.
A tidydata is generated which contains 10,299 observations and 68 columns (1 Subject column,1 Activity column, and 66 features columns)--Step2

Modify the column names and activity label
The activity labels (number 1 to 6) are replaced by the activity labels according to the information in the activity_label.txt--Step3
The column names were modified to make them more descriptive.The column names are tidied by removing the “()”, etc.--Step4

Reshape the data set to get the average of feature measurements for each subject on each activity--Step5
All the feature measurements in columns were melted into two columns by keeping the Subject and Activity columns (change the wide-format to long-format). 
Then calculate the average for each feature measurement within each subset of combinations of Subject and Activity.
Finally, the data is reshaped back to the wide format, with the averages of each feature measurements in columns for each Subject and each Activity.   

This result final_tidy_data.txt from last step is writen into tidy_data.txt for submission.
